In the 1600s, a man built the most
powerful telescope ever. And on January
7th, 1610, he used it to look further
than any human being in history.
But when he did, he saw something
strange.
Jupiter wasn't alone. There were three
small stars. Over the next few days,
they moved, and then there were four.
But that was impossible. Stars didn't
move like that. For centuries, humanity
believed the sky rotated us. The sun and
planets orbited Earth. The stars were
fixed on a shell. Medieval scholars
thought they were embedded in a
crystalline sphere that rotated every 24
hours around a stationary Earth. But the
man saw stars that were moving. He
thought he must have miscalculated, but
his observations were consistent. The
four stars were being dragged by the big
planet almost like they were orbiting it
almost as if they were moons. The man
found four bodies that shared a
different center for the first time in
human history. But that which will
excite the greatest astonishment by far
and which indeed move me to call the
attention of all astronomers and
philosophers is this namely that I have
discovered four planets neither known
nor observed by any one of the
astronomers before. [music]
These four planets would be called Io,
Europa, Ganymede, and Kalisto. The
Galilean moons. This is the story of how
humanity explored the Jovian system and
how it all led to what some believe is
one of the most difficult NASA missions
of all time.
>> The mission is called Galileo,
a return [music] to Jupiter.
[music]
In the 1960s, [music]
it was NASA's golden age. The Apollo and
Mariner missions led the [music] leaps
in space exploration.
America sent probes throughout the solar
system, but its [music] golden age was
ending. NASA's budget was propped up by
the Cold War. Vietnam and social [music]
reform programs from President Johnson
cost money. NASA's budget was targeted
[music] when cuts were debated. It was
bad news for NASA on Earth. But luckily,
they got good news hundreds of thousands
of miles away. A pioneer [music]
spacecraft passed Jupiter on its way out
of the solar system. Little was known
about the conditions [music] past Mars.
Any human spacecraft could die before
intended. Maybe the asteroid [music]
belt was impossible to pass. Or
Jupiter's radiation was so strong that
it fried any technology that came too
close. But the pioneer didn't just reach
the king of [music] planets.
It reported back.
Studying it [music] up close was
possible. So, a plan for a thorough
investigation was coming.
In 1975, [music]
NASA authorizes a study for a spacecraft
that can study Jupiter and its moons,
Galileo.
Jupiter is the largest and [music]
closest of all the outer planets. It is
also the most similar to a star out of
any planet in [music] our solar system,
110,000th the mass of our sun. This
makes the Jovian system special. Jupiter
is a giant gravitating central body, but
it has at least four moons with only a
few thousandths of its mass. It is a
mini solar system within our solar
system. Like the terrestrial planets and
our sun, Jupiter and its moons have
unique features. [music] Features they
may reveal secrets about our entire
solar system waiting to be discovered.
>> When work began [music] on Galileo,
there were three ways to explore the
outer solar system. A deep space flyby.
The spacecraft [music] stays in
interplanetary space. It flies past one
or more planets, gathering data during a
short encounter.
An orbiter. It breaks into orbit around
a planet [music] or system. And a
planetary entry. A probe probes a
planet.
Each class of mission had been launched
separately before, but NASA wanted a
spacecraft that could do both. an
orbiter with a probe.
Galileo would be launched on a direct
path to Jupiter. 5 months before it
reached the planet, it would release its
probe on a one-way journey into
Jupiter's atmosphere. The orbiter would
then enter the planet's orbit and
provide long-term observations. The
orbiter and probe combined were already
at the limits of spacecraft complexity,
but NASA was going to take it a step
further. By the time Galileo was
attempted, there were only two
spacecraft [music] designs that made it
to the outer planets, a Pioneer and a
Voyager. Pioneer spun around its axis.
[music] This allowed sensors to sweep
the sky, but it risk lower resolution
images.
Voyager was inertially fixed that
required more fuel and made it more
difficult for certain sensors, but it
did provide the camera stability [music]
for good imaging. The Galileo combined
both a slow spinning rotor for high
energy physics experiments. [music]
A despun section on top for cameras and
spectrometers. Powering the machine were
two radioisotopic thermmoelectric
generators. The same generator that was
used for [music] other successful NASA
missions. It was an ambitious machine
for an equally ambitious mission.
Proposed in 1975 and launched in 1982,
[music]
arrive at Jupiter in 1984.
But then things started to go very
wrong.
In 1971, Torrance Johnson published a
paper summarizing our most up-to-date
knowledge surrounding the Jovian system.
It showed the limits of our knowledge
from Earth. We do not know what the
satellite surfaces look like. We do not
understand the composition of their
atmospheres.
A the Galilean satellites are profoundly
different from the terrestrial planets
the moon, Mercury, and Mars. B. The
satellites differ among themselves
greatly. C. Their location around a
giant planet has major importance
[music] in their origin and evolution.
Io is similar in size to the moon.
Europa somewhat smaller and Ganymede and
Kalisto distinctly larger, similar
[music] to Mercury. Io and Europa have
lunar-like densities while the two outer
larger satellites Ganymede and Kalisto
have extraordinarily low densities for
solid planetary bodies. These densities
[music]
argue strongly for significant amounts
of water in Ganymede and Kalisto.
[music] The similarities of the
satellite systems to the solar system
may well go deeper. Brightness
variations [music]
observed for more than a century remain
virtually unchanged. Strong evidence
that the gravitational pull of [music]
Jupiter keeps one hemisphere of each
satellite toward it. Io and Europa are
[music] 5 to 10 times brighter than the
moon. Ganymede only slightly darker and
Kalisto the darkest still almost twice
[music] as bright. Such bright surfaces
naturally suggested icecovered surfaces.
Io does [music] not appear to have water
frost. The answers to these and many
other questions await [music] detailed
examination of the system by spacecraft.
Hopefully, the next generation [music]
of orbiting spacecraft will allow more
detailed exploration of the satellite
surfaces.
Barely 4 weeks after the Galileo mission
officially started, the team encountered
an existential problem. The spacecraft
was too heavy. They needed to lose
weight, but the only thing they could
sacrifice was fuel. But without fuel, a
direct flight to Jupiter was impossible.
Its IUS rocket wasn't strong enough. But
they did have another option. A Centaur
G Prime rocket. It used liquid hydrogen
as opposed to kerosene and packed a hell
of a punch. It could theoretically lift
40% more payload per kg at liftoff, but
there were trade-offs. Liquid hydrogen
fuel is especially explosive. The fuel
could leak through the smallest cracks.
Its low boiling point made it difficult
to work with. The rocks presented a
higher risk for the shuttle and its
astronauts. The work required to make
the Centaur engine safe was expensive.
Galileo was stuck between not enough
power or danger. So, the team considered
a different trajectory [music] entirely.
If they had to cut fuel, maybe they
could rely on a Mars gravity assist
instead. But that meant the timing had
to be just right. A 5-month delay to
reach Jupiter and a stricter window to
launch. They would still only have
enough fuel for Galileo to orbit Jupiter
five times [music] instead of 11. This
was their best chance, but they missed
it. Development was delayed. They missed
the Mars deadline, shattering their
hopes for a 1985 launch.
Galileo was stuck on the ground.
Engineers debated splitting the
ambitious plan into two. A separate
flight for the probe, another for the
orbiter. But then the delays kept
coming. The Reagan White House targeted
NASA for more cuts. Galileo was put on a
hit list for potential cancellations,
but they still had one powerful option.
Crafting the Centaur engines to be safe
for launch was no longer [music] the
more expensive option. More dangerous,
sure, but Galileo can make it to Jupiter
with its fuel intact.
So, on December 23rd, 1985, Galileo
arrived at the Kennedy Space Center. In
May 1986, it would head to the Jovian
system on top of Centaur engines.
It was finally ready to launch.
In late January, NASA threw a party to
introduce Galileo's JPL staff to the
Kennedy [music] Space Center personnel.
The launch was some months away, but the
Kennedy Space Center team was kept busy
by [music] the Challenger shuttle that
was due to launch in 4 days. While they
celebrated at Kennedy Space [music]
Center, the warm Florida weather started
to cool.
In 1979, [music]
the Voyager missions did two high-speed
flybys of Jupiter. They were brief
encounters, but they were vital in
updating our understanding of the Jovian
system. In 1971, [music]
John S. Lewis was the first to really
publish the idea that there were oceans.
The Galilean satellites very likely have
extensively melted interiors, an
extensive mantle of ammoniarich liquid
[music] water, and a relatively thin
crust of ices. If true, this meant
massive subsurface oceans beneath
Europa, Ganymede, [music] and Kalisto.
>> The similarities of the satellite
systems to the solar system may well go
deeper.
>> Like the hydrothermal vents that
produced [music] us, scientists saw a
mini solar system with potentially the
same initial preconditions for [music]
life. Active planets spewing molten rock
into water. But it was purely
theoretical. There wasn't enough
evidence, [music] and there were plenty
of doubts.
Scientists RT Reynolds and Cassen said
that if any point there was liquid
[music] water, the massive ice shells on
top would freeze it. In spite of the
visible evidence of our terrestrial
example, liquid water appears to be
uncommon in the solar system. Although
they are comparable in size to the
terrestrial planets, they contain a
considerably larger fraction of
condensed H2O.
>> Reynolds and Cassin criticized Lewis'
models directly. A further consequence
of the Lewis models [music] was the
result that the bulk of the mantle
consisted of liquid water with only a
thin outer crust of solid ice. If so,
the amounts of liquid water involved
[music] would dwarf that contained in
the Earth's oceans. Thermal convection
in this planetary ice layer is efficient
and will solidify an underlying liquid
shell [music] in a time that is short
compared with the age of the body. They
argued that if there was ever liquid
water on the three outer satellites, the
top layer of ice would eventually
quickly freeze it. The planets simply
weren't hot enough to have the massive
oceans Lewis was proposing. But there
was one other possibility.
Days before Voyager 1 arrived, Reynolds
and Kassen published another paper.
Theoretically, the Jovian satellites
could be warmer if Jupiter's
gravitational pull caused them [music]
to flex. Flex that could generate heat.
Heat that could melt rock. And if it
could melt rock, maybe it could melt
ice.
When Voyager passed Jupiter, that theory
got evidence. They received [music]
visible proof of active volcanoes on Io.
In 1982, [music]
David Morrison published the most
comprehensive review of the Gileian
satellites. Building on this newfound
information,
>> the most geologically active body known
in the solar system with a variety of
ongoing volcanic eruptions clearly
[music] placing this satellite in a
class by itself. The highest measured
mountains rise 9 km, giving Io the
greatest topographic relief of any of
the Galilean satellites. Both Kalisto
and Ganymede have crusts consisting
predominantly of water ice. Europa, the
smaller sister of Io, is presumed to be
of primarily rocky composition. This
rocky interior, however, is totally
invisible, being covered by a crust of
water ice with perhaps a global ocean of
liquid water underneath. [music]
>> There wasn't enough evidence to formally
conclude that there was liquid water on
Jupiter's [music] moons. But back in the
early '7s, Lewis had suggested a signal.
An extensive electrically conducting
mantle [music] forced to convect by an
input of heat from below may be
conducive to the production of a
measurable magnetic field. They needed a
strong magnetometer to come close enough
to each of [music] the moons. But there
was only one spacecraft that could
provide them with what they needed and
it was waiting for them at the Kennedy
Space Center.
>> Today is a day for mourning and
remembering.
Nancy and I are pained to the core by
the tragedy of the shuttle Challenger.
>> Challenger had launched 24 times [music]
already. It was a reliable craft, but by
the 25th time, there had never been such
a cold launch. In the morning, foot long
icicles were seen hanging on structures
around the [music] craft. The lower
section of Challenger's left booster was
coated with sheet ice. [music] The
O-rings in the engine were stiff.
On January 28th, 1986, [music]
73 seconds in, the O-rings breached. The
shuttle's tanks failed. Hydrogen and
oxygen mixed. Challenger was engulfed in
a fireball.
The worst space [music] disaster in
American history.
>> Engine throttling up three engines now
at 104%. [music]
>> Challenger, go with throttle up. Go
throttle up.
[music]
I've always had great faith in and
respect for our space program and what
happened today does nothing to diminish
it.
>> NASA [music] grounds its fleet. They
tell every project to provide evidence
that they can't produce a crew loss
hazard. But Galileo was set to go on top
of a center G-prime rocket. So the
launch was scrapped.
But Bob Mitchell decided to give it one
more chance.
With four of the best minds for
trajectory mechanics at JPL, they looked
for a different path. Most of the team
had been planning for a Venus or Earth
[music] assist or some combination of
the two, but that was impossible. There
was no viable trajectory that didn't fly
too close to the sun or ran out of fuel
and missed Jupiter.
But Roger Deal came to Mitchell with an
idea. They could send Galileo to Venus,
then back to Earth, then back to Earth a
second time. a Venus earth gravity
assist or vega ga trajectory. It didn't
give Galileo any [music] more energy,
but it didn't need to.
It gave it something else, a bend in its
trajectory [music] that sent it right to
Jupiter. Galileo was fitted with new
thermal blankets and shields to protect
it as it traveled closer to the sun.
On October 18th, 1989, 5 years after it
was supposed to launch, it was finally
ready. Galileo left Earth and headed to
the Jovian system. But the problems
[music] were just starting. On February
10th, 1990, Galileo reached Venus. Then
it headed back. In April, with the sun
behind it, its high gain [music] antenna
could finally be opened. It had been
folded in on itself to protect against
intense solar radiation. After 2 [music]
years in space, it would finally be
capable of sending and receiving data
quickly. The flight team sent commands
to open it. Its motors powered up. They
turned for 3 minutes, but then three
turned into five, and five turned into
eight. That wasn't right. They were
using way more power than what was
needed to open it. [music]
The team waited, but the signal that the
antenna opened never came. In the middle
of space, three of the 18 ribs of the
antenna had become stuck. The pins were
held in sockets and the coatings had
been worn down by the vibrations during
its long travel back and forth on Earth
caused by repeated delays. At least
three pins have been entirely worn away.
They were stuck [music] holding the
cocoon in place. The entire mission was
built around that high gain antenna.
Fully operating, it could transmit
134,000 bits [music] per second. There
were still two low gain antennas, but
they could only send 40 bits [music] per
second. The mission had to produce tens
of thousands of images of Jupiter and
its moons. Without the high gain
antenna, most of the data would just sit
in the craft's tape recorder memory. But
they couldn't offload that data with a
high gain antenna. They had a tiny hard
drive with practically no quick way of
clearing it. And they had 4 years to go
before reaching Jupiter.
They pulled the motors for weeks in an
effort to free the pins some 15,000
times. That didn't work. They spun it
while pulsing the motors in [music] an
attempt to use the centrifugal force to
push the dish open. That also failed.
They left the antenna pointing away from
the sun. The team hoped that they could
make use of the thermal expansion and
contraction of the metal as it cooled
and heated while pointed towards or away
from the sun. Nothing [music] happened.
They tried again a month later. Still
nothing. But they had one last chance.
On December 13th, Galileo [music] was
the furthest it would be from the sun.
The team used that chance to freeze the
antenna in an effort to finally
potentially free the stuck pins. The
maneuver began. The team waited,
but the signal that the antenna opened
never came. One of its most valuable
instruments was worthless.
The spacecraft could take as many
pictures as it wanted. Without a way to
send it back to Earth, they had to
remain on board the tape [music]
recorder. A tape recorder with limited
space and it was heading directly to the
Jovian system where it was supposed to
take tens of thousands of images. But
then things started going very wrong.
They didn't have access to any
is the remote desktop tool that changes
the game because it actually feels like
you're sitting right in front of your
screen. It uses proprietary codec
technology to give you lightning fast
connection speeds. This means minimal
latency and crisp visuals even if you
are on a slow internet connection. For
creators, this is a lifesaver.
You can access your higherformance
editing rig from a cheap laptop or even
a Raspberry Pi. It supports real-time
audio pass through so you can actually
scrub video timelines and edit sound
remotely without that annoying lag. And
if you need to move large files, Anyesk
uses secure direct file transfer. It
bypasses the cloud entirely, so your
data stays private and moves faster.
It's incredibly flexible. It runs on
every major platform, [music] Windows,
Mac OS, Linux, Android, and even
supports legacy systems like Windows XP
for you retro builders. With 99.98%
uptime, it is rock stable, and best of
all, for personal use, it is completely
free. Don't let distance stop your
workflow. Go to the link and download
any desk today.
But if they couldn't make Galileo shout
any louder, maybe they could make Earth
a stronger listener. They upgraded
NASA's deep space network to listen
better to faint signals. The team sent
software updates to Galileo. They
modified how the craft handled data,
eliminating information from an image
that wasn't valuable, reducing the
amount of storage that was needed. After
months of surgery in the vacuum of
space, the project staff announced that
Galileo was capable of completing 70% of
its intended scientific goals.
It flew by Earth for its second and
final time [music] on December 8th,
1992. Then it took its last long flight
to the King [music] of Planets.
Galile's approach was slow. In 1995, the
enormous planet filled [music] more and
more of the craft's horizon.
Galileo's arrival was greeted with a
never-before-seen [music] comet
colliding into Jupiter. Pillars of flame
shot up 3,000 km, releasing more energy
than a nuclear warhead. It was [music] a
welcome sign that the mission was
starting after such a long, painful
journey. On July 12th, 1995, Galileo
severed its probe. A cable cutter sliced
through the cord that tied them to each
other, and then it spun like a bullet
towards Jupiter. It would take 5 months
to reach the planet. They'd only know it
was working once it started plummeting
into the atmosphere.
The orbiter [music] headed to the moons.
Two weeks after releasing, Galileo fired
its engine. It first headed to Io,
Jupiter's small volcanic moon. From
afar, Galileo captured the probe signal
as it plummeted into Jupiter's thick
atmosphere. With a combination of two
low antennas, an onboard tape recorder,
and a lot of optimism, the team hoped
they would receive all the data. That
was a success.
>> They'd hoped this luck would continue,
but in August 1995, Galileo entered an
interplanetary dust storm.
Peeking through the curtain of dust on
October 11th, 1995, Galileo snapped a
photo of Jupiter, still some 36 million
km away. It must have been a truly awe
inspiring image. Jupiter encompassing
the entire sky with the Galilean [music]
moons dwarf beneath it. But that image
would never make it to Earth. The
command to transmit the data back to
Earth sent the realtore tape recorder
into a [music] panic. Once it began to
rewind, it never stopped. For 15 hours,
the [music] recorder remained stuck,
appearing to rewind endlessly.
Within hours on Earth, a duplicate of
the tape recorder suffered a
catastrophic malfunction. Faulty
circuitry [music] in the recorder failed
to sense when the tape had reached its
end, and the force tore the tape clean
off. half a billion miles [music] away.
Maybe Galileo suffered the same
devastating consequence with the tape
loose in the middle of space. The
mission over.
They sent new commands to stop the
recorder as the [music] team sank into
despair.
They needed it to store enough images to
send [music] back. Galileo did have a
small onboard computer, but it could
only store a few hundred images at best.
A week passed. Setback after setback had
played the Galileo mission since its
inception. The time had come for a final
test. Time to see if the recorder could
still [music] send data. It took more
than half an hour for a signal to reach
Galileo. It took another half [music] an
hour for Galileo to send a signal back.
Just a few seconds of data from the tape
recorder, but it was enough.
The tape recorder [music] wasn't broken,
but something had failed badly.
Capstance rotating shafts beneath the
tape [music] were responsible for
controlling the rewind and playback
speeds of the recorder.
A day before the failure, Galileo had
taken three snapshots of Jupiter and its
major moons. Each of the three images
would be overlaid to reconstruct a
single colored photograph. But with the
new images, the recorder had reached the
end of the tape and needed to be reround
back to the start. But sitting in disuse
during the long six-year voyage had left
the grease on the recorder's bearings
stiff. The reels couldn't turn easily
and the capston had lost traction and
slipped. Instead of turning the tape,
[music] they just spun in place like the
wheels of a car spinning uselessly on
ice. A billion dollar car. The team
needed to turn the tape back and forth
to redistribute the grease. But what if
15 hours of constant wear on a single
spot had worn down the tape? They had no
choice. The team sent Galileo commands
to turn the tape. The captains turned
the myar pull tight. The recorder pulled
the tape up to 25 times around the
potentially damaged section of the tape,
hopefully securing it in place.
The crisis was temporarily averted,
[music] but now the rolled up sections
of the recorder were permanently off
limits. Tucked away at the end of the
tape were the first images of Jupiter
and its moons during the December
approach. This was a particularly hard
blow for those studying Io. This strange
little volcanic moon was not part of the
primary [music] 2-year mission. The
images lost at the end of its tape might
have been the only ones we had of it.
Finally, after an almost 6-year odyssey,
the orbiter truly reached Jupiter. On
December 7th, 1995, Galileo's thrusters
were finally clear to fire, [music] and
the Jupiter orbit insertion maneuver was
initiated.
Galileo's trajectory was adjusted to
avoid a collision course with the
planet. 45 minutes into a 49minute burn,
orbital insertion was achieved. The
craft was captured by the planet's
gravitational field. Jupiter [music] had
many, many more moons than Galileo first
observed hundreds of years earlier
through a small handmade telescope. The
four Galilean moons were just the
largest of nearly 100 moons, each of
widely various sizes and shapes. On
December 7th, Galileo joined them. It
became the solar system's first man-made
moon.
And on June 27th, 1996, Galileo started
its first flyby.
It skimmed across the equator of
Ganymede.
Ganymede is not only the largest of the
Galilean moons, but it's the largest
moon in the solar system. If it were not
for Jupiter, it could have easily earned
the title of a planet for itself. While
less dense, it is larger than the planet
Mercury. Like its sister moons, Ganymede
likely formed from the leftover gas and
dust which formed Jupiter at the start
of the solar system some 4.5 billion
years ago.
At first glance, it appears very much
like Earth's own moon. It's tidily
locked with a gray surface, [music]
crowded with bright craters. The moon
resembles broken pavement, but made up
of ice instead of rocks.
It was now years after the Lewis
Reynolds and Cassen papers have been
published. But finally, there was a
magnetometer close to one of the moons.
Dr. Mara Kyson and her team confirmed
the detection of a large intrinsic
magnetic field. Glowing ribbons of
heated electrified gas circled the poles
and produced rippling auroras.
But watching the auroras, it seemed as
though the magnetic field sways. Because
Ganymede orbits close to Jupiter, its
magnetic field is embedded within the
larger planet's own field. When
Jupiter's magnetic field changes, Hubble
discovered the aurora shift, rocking
back and forth. But Ganymede shifted
less than expected. Fighting back
against the rocking, scientists believe
is an enormous ocean beneath the
surface, 60 mi deep, almost 30 times the
average depth of the ocean on Earth,
buried under a 100 miles of icy crust.
The data sent back was remarkable,
despite the mission nearly ending a
disaster multiple times. The tape
recorder could only hold so much data
before it had to be transmitted or
overwritten.
But the mission continued. By November,
Galileo arrived at Kalisto. The surface
a mixture of ice and metallic rock. As
Kalisto orbited the furthest from
Jupiter, it was less exposed to the
immense gravitational and tidal forces
that Jupiter exerted.
However, without [music] active
processes to erode and recycle the
surface of the moon, Galileo found an
ancient crittered surface which must
have taken billions of years [music] to
accumulate. Kalisto had long been
considered a dead moon, just ice and
rock hanging silently in cold space. But
Galileo and its magnetometer uncovered
another secret, another possible salty
ocean buried beneath its surface. The
research from decades before was
validated.
But then Galileo caught a glimpse of
Europa some 21,000 m away.
A month later, it was brought into
proper focus. Europa is the smallest of
the Galilean moons. Its reflective,
smooth, icy surface makes it blindingly
bright. It observed a vast network of
ridges and bands, some as large as 60 km
across and extending for hundreds of
kilome. Upon closer inspection, it
seemed strange. Moons are constantly
under assault from space debris. But
Europa was smooth. It also lacked
mountains. It seemed unlikely that
Europa had been spared the same
punishment as its siblings. 4 billion
years is a long time to be so lucky. The
smooth surface suggested constant
geological activity. Icy flows that
erase imperfections on the surface. It
also had an [music] atmosphere, albeit a
thin one, containing oxygen and even
water vapor. On Earth, oxygen is [music]
the result of plants and primarily
phytolanton in the ocean.
However, on Europa, the origin is likely
formed by charged particles from Jupiter
impacting the icy [music] surface,
splitting the H2O of water into hydrogen
and oxygen. But then the Galileo team
made another discovery.
Dr. Kyson's [music] magnetometer team
detected measurements for an
electrically conductive fluid, a global
salty ocean with twice as much water as
Earth. [music]
The distance from the sun and proximity
to the deadly amount of radiation from
Jupiter might have ruled out Europa as a
home for life, [music]
but the ice on the surface is a
double-edged sword.
On one hand, it acts as a protective
barrier to the internal liquid ocean,
preventing [music] the intense radiation
from irdiating any potential life
attempting to develop. However, the
surface [music] is also where important
chemical compounds are formed by
interactions with high energy particles
from Jupiter that would support life,
which the shell could [music] prevent
from reaching the liquid water beneath.
Moons like Ganymede and Kalisto might
have had oceans beneath their surfaces.
But those are estimated to be about 100
miles down, each hidden beneath a thick
[music] crust with minimal geological
activity to transport the vital
ingredients for life down to the oceans
beneath. But Europa [music] is
different. Its ocean sits closer to the
surface under an icy crust only 10 or 15
mi thick. Even without the sun to
provide energy to [music] the depths of
Europa's oceans, it is possible that
beneath the waves, Europa has a
different source of energy. Hydrothermal
vents that spew chemical energy.
They had saved Io for last out of fear.
It's the closest moon to Jupiter. It is
also the most hazardous. High energy
electrons pelted Galileo, piercing to
[music] the delicate electronics and
requiring constant staff maintenance.
When the first images of Io are relayed
back, it revealed a world on fire. The
moon is under immense gravitational
stress from Jupiter [music] and nearby
moons. The tremendous strain generates
the explosive volcanic activity that
riddles the surface. The grinding of
rocks melts the moon's interior where
eventually the molten rocks are forced
to the surface explosively. [music]
The camera on board Galileo captured an
active volcano on the surface of the
moon. It erupted more than a mile off
the surface. [music]
It is the youngest and most volcanically
active surface observed in the solar
system. Every second, [music] Jupiter's
magnetic field rips 1,000 kg, a literal
ton of its mass away. The debris is left
alone in orbit. Eventually, the charged
ions entered Jupiter's upper atmosphere,
where they produce [music] auroras.
As Galileo's end drew closer and closer,
it zipped only [music] 63 mi above Io's
volcanic surface. The final flyby snap
new pictures, but the primary purpose
was to put it on a final path.
Fuel was running low. The decision was
made to launch the craft into the
planet. Following its own probe, it flew
forward on a one-way trip that would
guide Galileo toward its last
destination. At 11:57 a.m. PST,
September 21st, 2003, decades after it
had begun and a half billion miles from
its start, Galileo disappeared into
Jupiter.
The Galileo project was led by multiple
generations of scientists and eight
different project managers. By its
conclusion, it had passed through the
hands of thousands of different people.
Jupiter is an inhospitable host at the
center of its own solar system that we
have only begun to understand.
More than 20 years after Galileo's
death, a new craft launched.
On October 14th, 2024, Europa Clipper
left Earth as a spiritual grandchild of
Galileo. It is the first mission
designed to study Europa specifically.
In the wake of the tantalizing
suggestions of subsurface oceans [music]
potentially teameming with alien life,
Europa Clipper will orbit Jupiter and
eventually conduct dozens of flybys of
Europa, scrutinizing its surface and
investigating its internal workings with
a vast array of [music] state-of-the-art
instrumentation.
Dr. Margaret Kyson, now in her '90s,
leads the magnetometer team to find
answers to the mystery she and her team
had originally discovered decades
earlier with Galileo.
Each instrument, orbiter, or probe is a
step which continues the long journey to
better understand our galactic neighbors
and our own place in the solar system. A
long way from where it began when an
Italian astronomer saw something he
thought were stars through the most
advanced instrument the world had at the
time.
Yo, this is Alex. I did most of the 3D
in this video and uh this project would
not have been possible without Super
Luminal. Super Lumino is the render farm
that our team builds and works with and
I've never seen any system more
optimized for Blender. I had over 100 4K
space shots plus compositing waiting to
render. And uh while that would have
taken weeks on my local PC, Super
Luminal took care of all that in hours,
which obviously superpowered our
production and it gave me a lot of
freedom to make some sweet cinematics.
To render, you just click one button on
their add-on to upload your project
file. It grabs all your assets, add-ons,
dependencies. You can then head to their
website interface where you can monitor
real-time previews and progress all
while keeping track of the performance,
speed, and minimal cost. [music] And
after a few minutes, you can instantly
fetch project jobs in the add-on to
download your renders to a file path.
Just like that. If you work on 3D
productions and want the easiest
renders, uh this is it. Check the link
in the description to uh learn more.